Add docs best effort responses (#3865)
dfinity/portal: docs/references/message-execution-properties.mdx

> To interact with a canister's methods, there are two primary types of **calls** that can be used: [update](/references/ic-interface-spec.md#http-call) calls and [query](/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec#http-query) calls.

Reviewer: Not part of your change, but apart from mentioning updates and queries here and in the paragraph below, we never clarify anything about either of them.

I haven't followed the link, but by the looks of the URL (involving HTTP endpoints), it refers to "replicated updates" and "non-replicated queries". Which is even more confusing, as further down we say "Each downstream call that a canister makes, query or update, triggers a message." Which may imply that a replicated message execution can somehow make a non-replicated query call.

Maybe it's necessary to explicitly state that this page is all about replicated execution (which I guess it is, but I'm not 100% sure, because there's also composite queries, which behave somewhat similarly to replicated execution). And briefly explain the difference between replicated updates and replicated queries.

Author: I've removed all the details about HTTP calls and focused on the endpoints - not sure if you're somehow looking at an old version of the PR...

The call must be addressed to an entry point of a canister, which is called a **method**. If the Rust CDK is used, these are usually annotated with `#[update]` or `#[query]`, respectively. In Motoko, updates are declared as `public func`, and queries use the dedicated keyword: `public query func`. ICP also supports additional [entry points](/references/ic-interface-spec.md#entry-points) such as heartbeats, timers, initialization or upgrade hooks.

> A **message execution** is a set of consecutive instructions that a subnet executes when a canister's entry point is invoked. The code execution for any such entry point can be split into several message executions if inter-canister calls are made. The following properties are essential:

Reviewer: I would try to introduce the "atomic" keyword somewhere in the first sentence.

A message execution can also happen for a response to a heartbeat or timer, so not only when invoking an endpoint.

In the second sentence, I would use direct language "if it makes inter-canister calls", to make it clear(er) that it's waiting for the downstream call responses that cause the split. Maybe even say "downstream calls".

> - **Property 1**: Only a single message execution is run at a time per canister. Message execution is atomic and sequential, and never parallel.

Reviewer: Nit: We start the page stating that the benefit of asynchronous messaging is that "individual messages can be executed in parallel". Maybe we should qualify one or both of the statements.

Author: Yeah, that's the technically correct statement, I'll rephrase. A single canister's calls can still be concurrent.

Author: I think I addressed all the points now raised, so resolving this.

- **Property 2**: Each downstream call that a canister makes, query or update, triggers a message. When using `await` on the response from an inter-canister call, the code after the `await` (the callback, highlighted in blue) is executed as a separate message execution.

> For example, consider the following Motoko code:

Reviewer: Nit: Also unrelated to your change, but prefixing this and other similar line with one (or four?) blanks would put this paragraph under the bullet point, so it would look like this
```
 * Property 2: ...

   For example, ...

 * Property 3: ...
```
instead of this
```
 * Property 2: ...

For example, ...

 * Property 3: ...
```

![example_highlighted_code](./_attachments/example_highlighted_code.png)

> The first message execution spans the lines 2-3, until the inter-canister call is made using the `await` syntax (orange box). The second message execution spans lines 3-5: when the inter-canister call returns (blue box). This part is called the _callback_ of the inter-canister call. The two message executions involved in this example will always be scheduled sequentially.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first message execution spans the lines 2-3, until the inter-canister call is made using the `await` syntax (orange box). The second message execution spans lines 3-5 when the inter-canister call returns (blue box). This part is called the _callback_ of the inter-canister call. The two message executions involved in this example will always be scheduled sequentially.
```

:::info

> Note that an `await` in the code does not necessarily mean that an inter-canister call is made and thus a message execution ends and the code after the `await` is executed as a separate message execution (callback). Async code with the `await` syntax (e.g. in Rust or Motoko) can also be used "internally" in the canister, without issuing an inter-canister call. In that case, the code part including the `await` will be processed within a single message. For Rust, both cases are possible if `await` is used. An inter-canister call is only made if the system API `ic0.call_perform` is called, e.g. by using the CDK's call method. In Motoko, `await` always commits the current state and triggers a new message send, while `await*` does not necessarily commit the current state or trigger new message sends. See [Motoko `await`](/docs/current/motoko/main/reference/language-manual#await) vs. [Motoko `await*`](/docs/current/motoko/main/reference/language-manual#await-1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that an `await` in the code does not necessarily mean that an inter-canister call is made and thus a message execution ends and the code after the `await` is executed as a separate message execution (callback). Async code with the `await` syntax (e.g. in Rust or Motoko) can also be used "internally" in the canister, without issuing an inter-canister call. In that case, the code part including the `await` will be processed within a single message execution. For Rust, both cases are possible if `await` is used. An inter-canister call is only made if the system API `ic0.call_perform` is called, e.g. by using the CDK's call method. In Motoko, `await` always commits the current state and triggers a new message send, while `await*` does not necessarily commit the current state or trigger new message sends. See [Motoko `await`](/docs/current/motoko/main/reference/language-manual#await) vs. [Motoko `await*`](/docs/current/motoko/main/reference/language-manual#await-1).
```

This is already quite a hefty paragraph, so I'm not sure about adding to it. But one other possibility is that the call fails synchronously (e.g. due to a full queue or memory limits).

:::

:::info

> Note that if the code does not `await` the response, the code after the callback is executed in the same message execution, until the next inter-canister call is triggered using `await`.

Reviewer: Not sure what's meant by "callback" here. In the await-async model, there are no explicit callbacks. Nor is it (by definition) a callback unless you call `await`.

So as long as it's clear that only `await` can (but not always will) split processing across separate message executions, I believe this paragraph can be dropped altogether.

Author: Callbacks are introduced in the paragraph above. But it doesn't make sense to talk about callbacks in the same message, so I changed to "call here". I wouldn't entirely drop this, because the note above only talks about when an `await` doesn't trigger a new message, but says nothing about what happens if there's no `await`.

> ![example_orderings](./_attachments/example_orderings.png)

Reviewer: Property 4 also talks a lot about "message [executions]". It should also be updated.

Author: Done

- **Property 5**: On a trap or panic, modifications to the canister state for the current message execution are not applied.

> For example, if a trap occurs in the execution of the second message (blue box) of the above example, canister state changes resulting from that message execution, even earlier in the blue box, are discarded. However, note that any state changes from earlier message execution and in particular the first message execution (orange box) have been applied, as that message executed successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if a trap occurs in the execution of the second message (blue box) of the above example, canister state changes resulting from that message execution, i.e. everything in the blue box, are discarded. However, note that any state changes from earlier message executions and in particular the first message execution (orange box) have been applied, as that message executed successfully.
```

> - **Property 6**: Inter-canister calls are not guaranteed to make it to the destination canister, and if a call does reach the destination canister, the destination canister can trap or return a reject response while processing the call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Property 6**: Inter-canister calls are not guaranteed to be delivered to the destination canister. And when a call does reach the destination canister, the destination canister may trap or return a reject response while processing the call.
```

> There are many reasons why a call might not be delivered to the destination canister. Some of them are under the control of the canister developers, such as the destination having sufficient cycles to process the call. Others are not; the Internet Computer may decide to fail the call if it's under high load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many reasons why a call might not be delivered to the destination canister. Some of them are under the control of the canister developers, such as the destination having sufficient cycles to process the call. Others are not; the Internet Computer may decide to fail the call under high load.
```

> - **Property 7**: Every inter-canister call is guaranteed to receive a response, either from the canister, or synthetically produced by the protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Property 7**: Every inter-canister call is guaranteed to receive a response, either from the callee, or synthetically produced by the protocol.
```

However, a malicious destination canister could choose to delay the response for arbitrarily long if it is willing to put in the required cycles. Also, the response does not have to be successful, but can also be a reject response. The reject may come from the called canister, but it may also be generated by ICP. Such protocol-generated rejects can occur at any time before the call reaches the callee-canister, as well as once the call does reach the callee-canister, for example if the callee-canister traps while processing the call. Thus, it's important that the calling canister handles reject responses as well. A reject response means that the message hasn't been successfully processed by the receiver but doesn't guarantee that the receiver's state wasn't changed.

> - **Property 8**: If the calling canister made a guaranteed response (as opposed to a best-effort response) inter-canister call, and the call reaches the callee-canister which then produces a reply or reject response, the protocol guarantees that the callee-canister's generated reply or reject response gets back to the caller-canister.

Reviewer: I don't think this is broad enough. I would put it in terms of "for guaranteed response calls there is always exactly one globally unique response to a call (whether from the callee or from the protocol)".

Or even "there is always one single globally unique response for every canister call (originating from either the callee or the protocol); if the call is a guaranteed response call, then this unique response is guaranteed to be delivered to the caller; if it was a best-effort call, then a `SYS_UNKNOWN` response may be delivered instead (and potentially before)". Or something along those lines.

Author: Overall, I'm not sure how useful it is to talk about the "real response generated by the system" in case of `SYS_UNKNOWN`, as this real response is not something observable by the user. What is observable is that the callee produced a response but it didn't get delivered. So we can introduce the internal requests and responses (including system-generated responses) if it's the simplest mental model for the user of what's happening, but if there's a simple way to explain everything using just what's observable, I'd prefer that.

Not entirely related, but my original idea was to have a property that only applies to guaranteed response calls, and we could just say "best-effort responses lack this property". But thinking about it, it's probably useful to have a separate property about losing responses that we can refer to.

Author: > The system itself may also produce a reject response without making the call at all and this is also guaranteed to be delivered to the caller. And, importantly, there is always exactly one outcome for every call.

This is covered by Property 7. This property just says that, for guaranteed response calls, if the caller actually produces a response, the user will get that response.

> The difference in the best-effort response case is that the system may at any time, including before the call completes or even begins execution, produce a SYS_UNKNOWN reject response 

Of course it's also true that for guaranteed response calls, if the system produces *some* response, only *that* response will be delivered to the user, which is not true for best-effort responses, and what you write is an entirely accurate description how the system works. What I'm saying is that in general, the user doesn't *need* to know how the system works. We just have to give them the simplest correct description of the behavior that they can observe. It might well be that the simplest explanation is to tell them how the system really works. I tried providing a simple description without going into the system details but it's quite possible that I failed. I hope my intention is clear now - if it was clear all along and you feel that it's too complicated or not precise enough, I will switch to what you proposed, otherwise take another look and LMK what you think.

Author: Maybe what's missing is to say something like "the call is only deliver at most once" in Property 5?

Reviewer: I just found it unnecessarily specific. IMHO there is no need to qualify this with "if the call is delivered to the callee and the callee responds without trapping".

But yeah, if you want to describe strictly the observable properties of the system, then this is more accurate. So it's entirely your call.
